Roadmap.
If you're in your second or third year,
whether you belong to a tier one, tier
two, or even a tier 69 college, everyone
wants that one damn job. Even I did. But
when I started my preparation, I was
completely confused watching multiple
roadmaps from YouTubers. They were all
correct in their own ways, but I just
couldn't relate to them, and I barely
had 3 months before placements. On top
of that, I was too lazy to follow
everything they suggested. For a while,
felt really hard. But after attending
multiple interviews and writing several
assessments, I realized something. There
are some things you need to focus on
deeply and some things that don't need
much attention. If you're going through
this journey, finding that balance is
the most important part. If someone,
like [music] my seniors, had explained
it to me this way, it would have been
much easier to approach the placements
right from the beginning. I used to
think that if I had known this in my
second year, I would have landed an
internship or a PPO and spent my fourth
year relaxed. But that didn't happen,
and that's okay. So, I don't want you to
repeat the same mistake. I mean,
learning from others' mistakes is always
better than making them yourself. So,
without any delay, let's start with DSA.
I started with Striver, but it's not
about who you follow, it's about how
consistently you practice. Try to solve
at least three problems a day,
especially when you don't have much
time. And honestly, I used to feel
scared when my friends were solving
problems on LeetCode. I mean, I
understood the concepts, I understood
the algorithms, but when it comes to
actually writing the code, I just
couldn't do it. But after days of
practice, I slowly got used to it. And
if you're in that phase right now, don't
worry, everyone goes through it. So, how
should you tackle DSA? Start with the
basics, arrays, strings, linked lists,
binary search, and recursion. Take your
time with these because this is the
foundation for advanced topics like
trees, graphs, and dynamic programming.
Especially recursion, I used to get so
confused with it. Even if you are just
average at advanced topics, you can
still land a 10+ LPA job. And if you're
strong in advanced DSA, 20+ LPA becomes
much more achievable. One important
thing I noticed in online assessments,
they give really tough problems. Most of
the time, I could only solve two out of
three. But when I went for interviews
for the same company, they asked very
basic questions. Why? Because in
interviews, they don't have much time
just for DSA. They have to test you on
multiple things. So, they give small
problems to understand your thinking
process. And one more thing, this is
very important. While writing code,
explain what you're doing. They judge
you based on your approach and
communication. Always start with the
brute force solution. Don't jump
directly to the optimized one. They want
to see how you think, how you approach
the problem, how you improve your
solution. That's it for DSA. And
remember, DSA gets you shortlisted, it
doesn't get you placed. So, don't do DSA
alone. You also need to cover other
things, and that's where we move to our
second important topic, CSE core
subjects. Because when you walk into an
interview, the first question isn't DSA,
it's something like, "Explain
polymorphism with a real-life example."
And suddenly, you're stuck. Oops.
DBMS,
OS, CN,
your programming language, and even the
basics of AI.
These are main things you need to focus
on. Honestly, there is nothing fancy
here. I simply watched the videos, made
notes, revised them, and then started
practicing interview questions from
GeeksforGeeks. There are the standard
questions from these topics, and you
just need to cover those, nothing more
than that. But for SQL, I'd strongly
recommend practicing problems from the
LeetCode SQL 150 list. It's very
important, and it doesn't take much time
to get comfortable with it. If you're
targeting top tier companies or MANN,
then you should also add basic system
design skills to your preparation. And
let me tell you something that really
stuck with me. I had a friend, his name
is Ashok. He didn't get placed until
December. Out of fear, he started
preparing for GATE and went really deep
into computer networks. His GATE exam
went average, and he even failed two
more interviews after that. But in the
next [music] interview, they asked him
computer networks for almost 30 minutes
out of a 50-minute interview. And do you
know what offer he got? 20 LPA. You
never know what will show up. Something
you might study today might not help
immediately, but it will show up when it
matters the most.
>> [music]
>> So, don't just by heart definitions and
concepts, understand them. Who knows,
that might be the reason you crack your
next interview. And when I think about
interviews, the first thing that comes
to my mind is
>> [music]
>> And this is where most people mess up
badly. Your resume gets scanned for
about 45 seconds before the interview
starts, and then for the next 30
minutes, everything comes from it. So,
whatever you put there, you need to own
it completely. So, what should your
resume contain? Let's start with
projects. They matter a lot, but don't
over-invest time in them. I have [music]
seen a friend with a very basic project,
like a movie rating system, get placed
before someone with an insane AI
project. Because the project itself
isn't the point, the real question is,
do you understand what you built? Can
you explain it clearly under the
pressure? That's it. They don't care if
you took help from AI or cloned it from
GitHub, as long as you can explain it
like it's truly yours. Along with
projects, be ready for questions around
your CGPA. If it's low, be ready to
explain why. If it's great, especially
for a non-CSE branch, be ready to
explain why you're not going into core.
[music] You need answers for both. You
can mention internships, certifications.
If you have attended any hackathons, you
can mention those, too. Tools like Git,
VS Code, your roles and
responsibilities, like your role in a
college fest. And even if you feel like
you haven't done much, you still need to
be ready for questions like, "What's the
most difficult situation you faced while
organizing the fest, and how did you
handle it?" Yeah, that's how it works.
One more thing, [music] have multiple
versions of your resume. For example,
one for SD roles, one for data science
roles. Because even small changes in how
you present your projects can make a
huge difference. And avoid generic lines
like team coordination or time
management. Everyone writes that, and no
one gives a about that. And if
possible, keep your resume to one page.
Make it look full, structured, and
intentional. Because at the end of the
day, your resume sets the stage, and
your ability to defend it decides
everything. [music]
And how do you defend your resume? By
communicating well.
>> [music]
>> You don't need fancy vocabulary, don't
need to sound like a native speaker. The
interviewer just needs to understand you
clearly. That's it. Let me tell you a
small story. There was this interview,
and the interviewer asked me a question.
"Okay, Manohar, so what is linked list?"
I answered it. Then he asked me a
follow-up question. "Oh, how do you use
linked list in real life?" While trying
to confirm it, instead of saying,
"That's your question, right?" I looked
at him and said, "So,
do you asked me how do you use uh
linked list in real life examples? Uh is
that a question, sir?"
Yeah, it's a question.
It was at this moment that he knew he
up. And trust me, small things
like this matter more than you think.
Some of my friends even got terminated
from a campus drive just because they
said the wrong things, like telling the
interviewer he wasn't interested in the
role because he planned to pursue higher
studies. So, don't be like me or them.
Just be aware of what you are saying. A
few more things you need to keep in
mind, aptitude. Every online assessment
has it, and people miss out on even 40
LPA jobs just because they mess it up.
So, don't take it lightly. Puzzles. Some
companies will ask them, and trust me,
it's very hard to solve puzzles on the
spot if you're not prepared. So,
practice standard ones from
GeeksforGeeks. HR questions. You can use
tools like ChatGPT to prepare
company-specific answers like, "Why do
you want to join this company?" For
common questions like, "What are your
strengths? Where do you see yourself in
5 years?" Prepare a standard answer so
you can confidently reuse it across
interviews. And that's pretty much it.
Four things, DSA, core subjects, resume,
communication. You don't need to be
perfect in everything, you just need to
be good enough in all of them. And
honestly, this whole placement journey
has its highs and lows. You win some,
you lose some. But that's part of it.
So, don't feel bad about the interviews
that didn't work out. Be glad you went
through them because they are the reason
you'll get the one that does. So, don't
lose hope, stay consistent, be confident
because that's the only thing you
control. The rest will fall into place.
>> [music]
[music]